# The Basics of Rulers

Every Player is the Ruler of their own Realm. This is the total area they control and is made of Territories. A Territory marks an area on the map. A Realm may cover several Territories. New Territories can be Annexed through Diplomacy, Conquest or Trade.

Every Territory has a number of Resources, which are decided when the World is created. There are two types of Resources: Common and Luxury. These Resources are never consumed. Each Resource can sustain a certain number of Industries. Industries produce Products in your Realm which generates Wealth. How much Wealth an Industry creates depends on whether they are made from Common or Luxury Resources.

Wealth can be Taxed. Taxes are the only way a Ruler makes Money. A Ruler can use this money to construct Buildings, Recruit Troops and perform other Actions.

Buildings and Troops need to be maintained, while a Stipend is paid to all Nobles in the Realm to pay for their daily needs. These costs are all part of the Realm's Upkeep which must be paid every Turn. One Turn equates to the passage of one Season in game time. One Year is 4 Seasons (Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter).

Constructing Buildings, Recruiting Troops, and Travelling from one Realm to another are all Actions which take a certain number of Turns depending on their complexity or the distance involved.

Buildings cost money and take a certain number of turns to finish construction. Some require access to a certain Resource in order to function. Buildings will increase the Upkeep of the Realm. Once completed, a Building will have a passive effect on your Realm, allowing the Ruler to perform new Actions, provide new Resources for other Industries or Buildings, or allow different types of Troops to be recruited.

Troops are needed to defend the Realm, or to conquer Resources and Settlements from other Realms or Territories. It takes a certain number of Turns to train every new Troop. Some Troops will require specific Buildings in order to be recruited. Troops can be assigned to Garrisons or Settlements and will automatically defend them in the event of an attack. They are assigned to the Noble of the Settlement where they were recruited. Their loyalty is first to their Noble, and then to the Ruler.

The Ruler governs their Realm and their capital City. Nobles administer the other Settlements in the Realm. Settlements come in three sizes: Villages, Towns and Cities. Every Resource Site and Farming Community has a Village. Farming Communities produce Food for Towns and Cities. As Buildings are constructed, Villages grow into Towns, and Towns grow into Cities.

Food also creates Wealth, and can be Traded too. Food has less Value than Industries from Common or Luxury Resources. Eventually, a Realm will simply not have enough land to feed its population, and will have to expand to acquire new Territories, or import Food from afar, in order to sustain itself.

Trade Routes can be opened with other Realms to increase the Wealth created by Industries as well as allow access to Resources and Technical Knowledge. When two Realms trade with one another, both Realms are treated as having access to each other's Resources for the purposes of Buildings and Recruitment. Trade Routes will also allow the free flow of any commodity each Realm does not have, even including ideas and Religions.

Players can perform actions as their Rulers. These actions include passing laws, recruiting Troops, ordering the construction of Buildings, levying Taxes, and performing Political Actions. Political Actions are limited by what Action Words are available to the Player.

Nobles can be sent on missions on behalf of their Ruler, but they may pursue their own motivations and ambitions instead.

Money flows into a Ruler's treasury through Taxes. Taxes can be levied on anything which has a Value and generates Wealth. Wealth is created by the Resources and Industries a Realm controls. Every Resource site can support a certain number of Industries of a certain type (e.g. Iron ore → Blacksmith's). Luxury Resources and Industries usually have a higher Value than Common Resources and Industries. Certain Common and Luxury Resources can also be combined together to produce items of a higher Value. Trading with other Realms is another way to increase the Wealth generated by Industries and Resources.

If a Ruler wants to increase the Wealth of the Realm beyond that, they will need to acquire more Resources, open Trade routes, or invest in Buildings which will increase the Value from Resources and Industries they already control.

A Ruler will need to Tax either Resources or Industries in order to benefit from the Wealth in their Realm. However, levying Taxes creates Turmoil. Turmoil is also created by unrest in the Realm. Turmoil will increase the likelihood of a Peasant uprising, and of Nobles questioning the Ruler's authority to govern. Ambitious Nobles may take advantage of a dire situation to start a rebellion, placing themselves on the throne.
