# Traditions

Traditions All traditions provide some sort of benefit, or bonus, to
your Realm. They represent things your people are famous for, and are
skilful at. Traditions List: Tradition Effect Artisanal Grants the High
Quality\
bonus Academic Awards a University Diplomatic +1 on Diplomacy rolls
Outrider +1 to Message Speed Mercantile +10% Trade bonus Sporting Awards
a Coliseum Born in the Saddle Awards Stables and better Cavalry
Architectural Civic Buildings take 1 less turn to build Masters of
Villainy +1 to Subterfuge rolls Pathfinder Armies gain +1 Speed Pious
Awards a Cathedral Militaristic +1 to Military Rolls Horde Tactics +2
Morale for Basic Troops Chivalric +2 Morale for Elite Troops "The
Immortals" Combat bonuses for one Troop. If it dies, the bonus is lost.
Encouraged Labour Fortifications take 1 less turn to build However, many
traditions come with a Guild , Order or Society . The more powerful
these organisations become the more they can help, or hinder you.
Traditions come in three different types: Social , Industri - al and
Military . Each Realm gets to choose three tradi - tions from the list
below.Civic Traditions Academic University Academic Society This
Tradition provides a University in your main city, which belongs an
Academic society which. You can choose any field of academia from
Natural Philosophy, to Theology, Chemystry or just, regular Philosophy.
Diplomatic +1 all Diplomatic rolls Your Realm is well known for its
diplomacy and silver tongues. This Tradition provides a +1 bonus to all
diplo - matic actions taken by your nobles. Sporting Coliseum Whether
its Gladiatorial Combat, Chariot Racing, or Wizard Death Battles, the
people of your Realm love to compete! This Tradition places a Coliseum
in your Capital, which provides the normal bonuses a Coliseum does. In
ad - dition to this, once a year, your Realm holds a Sporting Event that
all other Realms are invited to compete in. Outrider +1 to the speed of
your Messengers No rider is faster than those in your Realm. All of your
Messengers travel one speed faster. Pious Cathedral Religious Order The
peoples of your Realm are known for being dedicat - ed to the cloth, for
being devoted servants of the faith. The Pious Tradition provides a
Cathedral for the capital of the Realm, which must be owned by the
dominant Religious Order of the Realm.

28Industrial Traditions Mercantile +10% Wealth creation from Trade The
merchants of your Realm are famed for being able to squeeze out that
little extra bit of profit. While a Settlement is trading with another
Realm, the Wealth generated by that Trade route produces an addi tional
+10% Wealth. This does not affect the Turmoil generated by the Tax.
Artisanal Grant the High Quality bonus to one industry. Your Realm's
Artisans are famous for producing one type of product with exceptional
skill and craftsmanship. Select one industry you already have, and
upgrade its quality tier to High Quality. Born in the Saddle Provides
Stables +1 Morale to all your Cavalry Troops The people of your Realm
have a natural affinity with equine beasts and mounted combat. This
tradition provides your Realm with Stables, which al - lows for the
Recruitment of Cavalry Troops. In addition to this, your Cavalry Troops
are more effective than others in battle. Architectural Civic Buildings
take 1 less turn to construct (minimum 1) The Architects of your Realm
have both a flair for art, as well as an exceptional skill with design.
All Civic Buildings take one less turn to build in your Realm. Military
Traditions Masters of Villainy +1 all Subterfuge rolls There are rumour
surrounding your Realm of deceit and cunning. This Tradition provides a
+1 to all Subterfuge actions taken by your nobles.Pathfinder +1 to
movement speed of all Armies The Pathfinders of your Realm accompany
your Armies whenever they travel outside of the Realm's Territory. These
excellent scouts provide your Armies with +1 speed whenever they travel.
Militaristic +1 to Military rolls Your Realm is famous for its
militaristic culture, and intrepid leaders. This Tradition provides a +1
to all Military rolls by Nobles from your Realm. Horde tactics +2 Morale
for all Basic Troops The hardy commoners of your Realm share a
comradery. Basic Troops from your Realm have a +2 bonus on all Morale
rolls.\
Chivalric +2 Morale for all Elite Troops The Nobles of your Realm uphold
a devotion to a Chival - ric tradition. Elite Troops from your Realm
have a +2 bonus on all Morale rolls. "The Immortals" +3 Combat bonus and
+2 Morale for one specific Troop. Your Realm is infamous for one
terrifying Elite unit of warriors. They are feared. They are
unstoppable. They are (seemingly) Immortal. Select one military Troop
you have at the start of play (you must be able to recruit this Troop
under normal rules). This one Troop unit gains +3 to all Combat Rolls
and +2 to its Morale rolls. The unit can be healed normally, but if the
whole unit is ever killed, the effect ends. Encouraged Labour
Fortifications take 1 less turn to build (minimum 1) If construction is
taking too long, then shout, shout and shout again! All Fortifications
take 1 less turn to build (but nobody enjoys building it).
