# Food for the People

A society can only function if its subjects are well fed. Hungry subjects are restless subjects, and if not for the welfare of the Realm, it is in the interest of the [Ruler's](12-creating-your-ruler.md) own wellbeing to keep the granaries stocked.

Food is produced by [Settlements](19-settlements.md). Typically, this is done by various agrarian communities that orbit them. A town, for instance, might have a few farmsteads dotted in the foothills around it. The Food produced by these Settlements can be a mix of several Foods that makes sense for the Realm to have, providing that they remain as basic Foods that could not be mistaken for Luxury [Industries](24-resources-and-industries.md). Sake and Rice, Cheese and Milk, Wine and Beef, Vodka and Potatoes would all be suitable examples of Food and drink produced. However, Honey and Ginger Ale or Cinnamon Buns and Coffee are not the foundations of a balanced diet for a whole society.[^29]

The numbers involved in Food production and need do not only reflect the quantity of Food being produced, but also the variety and the healthiness of the diet of the Realm's denizens.

## Food Production

For every empty [Building](26-buildings.md) slot, a Settlement produces that many Food. For every 1 Food produced, an additional Wealth of 2,000g is produced by that Settlement.

| | |
|---|---|
| Food produced | 1 per empty Building Slot |
| Wealth generated | 2,000g per 1 Food |

**Example:** Amethysia is a very Urban capital, so it depends on the town of Garnetia for most of its Food. Garnetia has a Temple, a [Port](26-buildings.md#port), and a Water Mill. It is using 3/8 of its Building Slots, so that leaves lots of space along the fertile river banks to produce 5 Food. In addition to its Porcelain [industry](24-resources-and-industries.md), the Food it produces generates 10,000g in Wealth.

Meanwhile, the Onor fortress of Ularet is a village fortified with Amethysian Garrisons. It has a Steel Forge, a [Fort](26-buildings.md#fort) and a [Watchtower](26-buildings.md#watchtower). It uses 3/4 of its Building Slots, so it produces only 1 Food from one small goat farm. This therefore only adds 2,000g to the Wealth generated by Ularet.

## Food Need

Each Settlement requires a certain amount of Food in order to sustain itself.

| Settlement Size | Food Need |
|---|---|
| Village | 1 |
| Town | 2 |
| City | 4 |

| Fortification | Food Need |
|---|---|
| [Fort](26-buildings.md#fort) | 1 |
| [Castle](26-buildings.md#castle) | 2 |

Even if Food is "eaten" through Food Need, it still produces Wealth because people are buying it at the market.

If there is not enough Food to support all the Settlements in the Realm, then [Turmoil](21-turmoil.md) will quickly increase, and eventually Starvation will take its toll. Sizeable military Garrisons will also require Food in order to keep [Troops](27-armies.md) stationed there. This includes free-standing Forts and Castles that are not a part of a Settlement.

## Territory Limits

While certain Buildings and Special [Actions](06-actions-in-rulers.md) can increase the amount of Food produced in the Realm, there comes a point when a [Territory](08-territories-and-resources.md) can no longer support further cultivation. One Territory cannot produce more than 30 Food, before bonuses from Buildings or Special Actions. While bonuses from Buildings or Special Actions can push one Territory to produce more than 30 Food, in order to exceed this, a Realm will have to expand its borders into new Territories.

## Food Shortages

Food can become sparse before this begins to cause serious resentment, or even starvation.

- If there is not enough Food in the Realm to meet demand for **one Season**, this upsets the populace. From a narrative perspective it would make them more likely to act against the Ruler, but has no immediate mechanical effect.
- If there is still a Food shortage for **another Season**, [Turmoil](21-turmoil.md) in the Realm increases by 1/4 of its current value, rounding up.
- This raises to **1/2** for each successive Season of Food Shortage.

Turmoil added in this way does not disappear until there is enough Food for everyone in the Realm for 2 Seasons.

[^29]: No matter how much you want it to be.
