# Trade

Trade occurs when two Realms, NPC or PC, sign a Trade Agreement. All goods which both Realms do not currently have are automatically imported. A negligible amount of other goods, books, religions and ideas, are also traded as part of the storytelling of the game.

This Trade Route connects two Realms through a specific [Settlement](19-settlements.md) in each Realm. This increases the Wealth generated by that Settlement by **5% of its total, for every Product being exported**.

**Example:** The Shadowfox Trading Company can offer Porcelain, Jewels and Gold along its Trade Route with Mordravale, as it does not produce any of these fine products itself. This increases the wealth generated by the town of Profiteria by 15%! Meanwhile Brasaholm gains just 5% to its wealth for only having lacquerware to offer Shadowfox. However, as the only producers of such a fine product, they are unlikely to lose this trade any time soon.

In addition to this immediate financial gain, a Realm is treated as having any [Resource](08-territories-and-resources.md) its trade partner has, for the purposes of Constructing [Buildings](26-buildings.md), Recruiting [Troops](27-armies.md), or performing Special [Actions](06-actions-in-rulers.md). So although a Realm may not quarry any Stone itself, if it is trading with a Realm that does, it is treated as having these materials itself, as it is now importing them from the Realm it trades with.

**Example:** Mordravale lacked the Stone it needed to build its new [Fortifications](26-buildings.md#fortifications). By opening a Trade Route with Cyria, it can now build a new [Castle](26-buildings.md#castle) (albeit at an added cost) by importing the Stone it needed. At the same time, Cyria can begin Recruiting Crossbow Troops (also at an added cost), as they can now hire expert instructors from Mordravale, and import fine Mord Crossbows for their new defensive regiment. However, keen to keep its Gunsmithing [technology](26-buildings.md#gaining-technical-knowledge) to itself, Amethysia is keen to keep its borders shut to merchants, which has made [Food Shortages](20-food-for-the-people.md#food-shortages) a tense issue in the capital city.

## Monopolies and Prices

After a trade link has been opened, a Realm will import all products it does not have. If a Realm is open to multiple trade links, then it will always buy the **best quality at the lowest price**. A Realm cannot import the same product from multiple sources — products are always traded in monopolies.

**Example:** The Shadowfox Trading Company is importing lacquerware from Mordravale along their Trade Route, but now it has begun Trading with the mysterious Crimson Empire, who offer lacquerware inlaid with gold. This new product is of a superior quality, so naturally the S.T.C. buys their lacquerware from the Crimson Empire instead, taking this export away from Mordravale.

Quality is determined by the number of [ingredients](24-resources-and-industries.md#combining-resources) a product has and whether it has the High Quality bonus or not. The High Quality bonus always trumps Products with the same number of ingredients.

| Quality (lowest to highest) | |
|---|---|
| Basic product | Lowest |
| High Quality product | |
| Basic + 1 Ingredient | |
| HQ + 1 Ingredient | |
| Basic + 2 Ingredients | |
| HQ + 2 Ingredients | |
| Basic + 3 Ingredients | |
| HQ + 3 Ingredients | Highest |

If the quality of the Product being imported is the same between multiple sources, then the product at the lowest price will be imported. Price is determined by how much a Product is being [Taxed](23-making-money.md) in its home Realm. Naturally, higher Taxes force merchants to increase their prices in order to accommodate them. So if multiple products of the same quality are entering a Realm through Trade Routes, the one with the lowest Tax rate will be bought by local merchants.

If a [Ruler](12-creating-your-ruler.md) wishes to maintain a trade monopoly, they may have to lower their taxes to beat their competitors, or seek out more Resource sites.

If the quality of all products is equal and the Price is also equal, then the product will be imported from the Realm whom the buyer has the best relationship with, as decided by the N.O. For instance, it's best not to trust suppliers whose [Settlements](19-settlements.md) are currently being ransacked by an invading [army](27-armies.md).[^30]

Whenever an imported product is changed to a different one due to changes in quality or price, that new product is protected for 2 seasons, to reflect the change in fashion.

[^30]: The Zenya Rules of Trade #78 — Seek business opportunities immediately before, or after, an invasion, but never during!
